# ATMS 597 Project 6 Group B
### Group Members: Carolina Bieri, Chu-Chun Chen, Jeffrey Thayer

This python program uses a deep neural network model and two regression techniques (multiple linear and random forest) from the sklearn package and two slowly-evolving factors (Madden-Julian Oscillation, or MJO, and soil moisture) to predict regionally-averaged daily accumulated precipitation from 1996-2019 in southeastern South America (SESA). This region was chosen in part since past work has shown influence by the MJO and soil moisture on precipitation (e.g., Grimm et al. 2007; Grimm 2019). Data are randomly split 70-30 into training and testing datasets. The accuracy of the deep neural network and each regression technique is determined by the root mean squared error (RMSE).

The daily precipitation data is provided by the Global Precipitation Climatology Project (GPCP; see https://climatedataguide.ucar.edu/climate-data/gpcp-daily-global-precipitation-climatology-project) and was averaged over the region from 25-30S/50-55W in SESA. The MJO index data (OLR+U850+U200) is provided by the Japan Meteorological Agency (https://ds.data.jma.go.jp/tcc/tcc/products/clisys/mjo/moni_mjo.html), with phase and amplitude used as features for prediction. Daily soil moisture from the first two ground levels (0-7cm and 7-28cm) averaged over 25-30S/50-55W is provided by ERA5 reanalysis (https://rda.ucar.edu/datasets/ds630.0/) and used as features. The MJO and ERA5 data are lagged at 5-day intervals from 5-30 days to test the predictability at a broad range of lead times relevant for the two selected slowly-evolving factors, with this lagged data also used as features. Year, month, and day are also added as features. 

We selected multiple linear regression and random forest regression as our baseline models. For the multiple linear regression, we used the default hyperparameters, and we calculated the RMSE to determine the prediction skill.

For the random forest regression, hyperparameter optimization was performed using RandomizedSearchCV for 300 random hyperparameter combinations. The prediction skill (i.e. RMSE) was then determined after running RandomForestRegressor using the best hyperparameter combination.
